# Project 6 - Data Visualization: US Flight Delay in 2008

## Summary

Using the RITA flight delay information for 2008, this visualization explores the relationship between US domestic flight delay frequency and the volume of flights among different airlines in the top 20 busiest airports. 

## Design

After exploring the data set, I decided to choose flight delay frequency and volume of flights as two main variables for my story. Knowing this information may help people make better decisions on picking their right airline for specific airports when they fly. I originally planned to present these two variables in a set of charts looping through all the airlines and airports. However, after summarizing the data and trying out different chart types, I noticed that there were more than 300 airports, which made it impossible to show all the data. Therefore, I only chose the top 20 busiest airports and airlines for this visualization. 

In this visualization, I would like the audiences to notice that 1) the top 20 busiest airports in US and their total volume of flights; 2) for specific airport, the volume of flights differs between different airlines; 3) the flight delay frequency differs between different airlines; and 4) the relationship between the flight volume and delay frequency. 

Regarding to the chart type, after reviewing examples on the Dimple webpage, I realized that a simple bar chart for the volume of flights might be good enough to deliver clear information. For instance, for each airport, comparisons on the volume of flights between airlines can be visually straightforward in a bar chart. On the other hand, a bubble chart for the flight delay frequency can be added as another layout on top of the bar chart. 

After sketching out the ideas, firstly I generated a bar-bubble combined chart for all the airlines in one airport. Then in order to loop through the top 20 busiest airports, I borrowed codes from the Price Change and Storyboard Control, two advance examples on the Dimple webpage, with some help from my Udacity Coach in an one-to-one consultation appointment. 

### Version 1

This initial version took me quite a long time, especially in data wrangling and setting up the initial code using dimple.js. The original data file from RITA is more than 600 MB. A summary data file flight2008_delay.csv generated by Python flight_2008.py is used for this visualization.

### Version 2

In this version, 1) the interval of y-axis for flight counts was changed to report exact number; 2) a floating bar chart was used to replace the bubbles for delay frequency, in order to align with the legend shape; 3) the x-axis for airlines was sorted by the average delay frequency across the 20 airports. 


## Feedback

I invited 4 persons with different backgrounds to comment on my visualization. According to their feedbacks, the most obvious problem was the accuracy of y-axis for flight counts, as the measurement interval was in a thousand rather than the exact number. The visual cues (i.e. bars and bubbles) were also less intuitive when I used two measure axis. In addition, an average delay frequency line and a sorting function on arrival/departure were requested by two audiences. Given that the airlines listed in x-axis should be independent to each other, unlike time series data, I would question whether a line chart is meaningful in this case. Therefore, I would rather make no change on adding this an average line here. 

### Feedback 1

1. What do you notice in the visualization?
When I click on the dots or bars, more details will be popped up. I can freely choose one of the datasets from different airports. If not specified, the airport datasets will scroll down one by one automatically. Resize the browser window will not distort the visualization.

2. What questions do you have about the data?
Is there any relationship between the delay frequency and the volume of flights?
Is the difference between arrival and departure delay airport-/airline-specific.

3. What relationships do you notice?
Arrival delay is more frequent than departure delay in general. Higher volumes of flights does not necessary lead to higher delay (there is no relationship between delay and the volume of flights). The arrival and departure delay frequency is not associated with airports and airlines. 

4. What do you think is the main takeaway from this visualization?
Delay seems to be independent from the volume of flights, airports and airlines. Other factors should be explored in order to explain the delay frequency. 

5. Is there something you don’t understand in the graphic?
I took a while to understand what the bar and the colored dots represent. It will be better if they are more intuitive. There may be a bug in MCO airport data. Endeavor Air Inc. has 100% delay but they do not have any volume of flights at that airport.

### Feedback 2

1. What do you notice in the visualization?
There is an animation showing the flight volumes of 20 airports in an ordered list on the right-hand side.  When I hovered on the bars and dots, there are more details.

2. What relationships do you notice?
Delay frequency for arrival flight is significantly higher than that for departure flight. There’s no relationship between flight volume and delay frequency. High volume doesn’t entail more delays.

3. What do you think is the main takeaway from this visualization?
Unlike what I expected, the flight volume and delay frequency is not correlated. I discovered that delay frequency for arrival is higher than that for departure when I was watching the animation. 

4. Is there something you don’t understand in the graphic?
For some airlines visually there is no flight volume, but there are dots indicating delay rates. But then I realize flight volume is measured in thousands. It’s hard to show a small number e.g. less than 1k. I tried to hover on the airline for more details and it said 0k instead of an exact number.

### Feedback 3

1. What do you notice in the visualization?
It displays the correlations between flight delays in US and 1)airports and 2)airlines. It also displays the frequency of flight delays. It is a interactive graphic that is easy to read.

2. What questions do you have about the data?
It takes a while to identify the meaning of scattered chart and bar chart. It would be good to have line across the dots for easier reading. Displaying the average number would also be helpful.

3. What relationships do you notice?
The variation for airlines and airports are both quite significant, but in general, larger airlines seem more stable or predictable. In terms of flight frequency, different airline has its own home airports.

4. What do you think is the main takeaway from this visualization?
Flight delay might be reduced (statistically) if I choose airline wisely by looking at where I am flying to and from.

5. Is there something you don’t understand in the graphic?
Why the count of departure and arrival for each airline in each airport is always the same?

### Feedback 4

1. What do you notice in the visualization?
Excellent and interactive visualization for Delay Frequency of Arrival/Departure and Flight Counts for each airline. Good display for Top 20 Busiest Airports.  

2. What relationships do you notice?
In most cases, small airlines (less fight counts) tend to have higher Delay Frequency. Furthermore, the Arrival Delay Frequency is higher than Departure for most airports.

3. What do you think is the main takeaway from this visualization?
It's better to choose large airlines (more flight counts) as most of them will have lower delay frequency. 

4. Is there something you don’t understand in the graphic?
Questions and suggestions:
It’s better to show the exact number of Fight Counts for each airline on the bar chart, especially for the 0k case.
It would be better to show the average arrival/departure delay frequency line on the chart, and also provide sorting function on arrival/departure for the user to choose airlines.


## Resources

http://dimplejs.org/advanced_examples_viewer.html?id=advanced_price_range_lollipop
http://dimplejs.org/advanced_examples_viewer.html?id=advanced_storyboard_control
http://dimplejs.org/examples_viewer.html?id=bars_vertical_floating
https://github.com/d3/d3/wiki/Gallery
http://bl.ocks.org/JasonCabral/964063d4534c899f8fd41d8e8b929336#index.html
https://github.com/sebasibarguen/udacity-nanodegree-visualization
https://discussions.udacity.com/t/page-is-not-displayed-properly-on-bl-ocks/174891/2

